---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

*Frontline Nurses: Leaders in Pandemic Response* formed in 2018 to study
the role of nurses and midwives as change agents in prevention,
detection, and response to pandemic infectious disease outbreaks. It is
widely acknowledged that nurses are crucial to combatting pandemics, but
nurses are generally excluded when municipal, state, and international
policymakers gather to set protocols and priorities for pandemic
response. This is a dangerous and consequential omission.

Nurses comprise 70% of the global health workforce, and during
infectious disease outbreaks they deliver the majority of treatment,
creating and supporting hygienic standards, devising and implementing
protocols for infection control, building resilient teams, and working
with communities on safety measures. Successful containment of epidemic
outbreaks requires local knowledge and familiarity with how people live,
and nurses and midwives have the trust of the communities they serve,
together with a powerful ethical commitment to their work, despite the
danger and sacrifice it demands.

When the Ebola Virus Disease broke out in western African countries in 2014,
nurses helped end the outbreak despite a slow international response,
weak health care infrastructure in the region, and the lack of either
effective therapies or a vaccine. The work of defeating Ebola happened
on the frontlines, and it was work driven by nurses.

The failure to incorporate nurses' knowledge is pervasive at all levels
of healthcare workforce delivery, from the top down. As our interviews
document, nurses have crucial insights and innovations that derive from
their hands-on experience. Yet the World Health Organization (WHO), for
instance, had no role for nurses in its leadership team until 2017. When
we surveyed international health policy guidelines, we found almost no
inclusion of nurses. One explanation for this startling absence is that
80% of nurses in most regions of the world are women, and women continue
to be strikingly underrepresented in health care leadership roles
because of both gender bias and the hierarchical, MD-centered
organization of the health care workforce.

It is in this context that *Frontline Nurses* works *to document* the
role of frontline nurses in pandemic disease outbreaks, *to recognize*
nurses for their critical contribution to public health during
emergencies, and *to advocate* for nurses' role in health care
policymaking.

*Frontline Nurses* draws on the work of the health science community --
nursing, medicine, and public health -- as well as the scholarship on
health security and regulation and on gender in professional cultures.
To document the role of nurses, we employ the methodology of oral
history developed by the Columbia Center for Oral History Research. Our
group members come from many parts of the world and many different
backgrounds. 

Contact us at frontlinenurses@gmail.com.

## Project participants:

*Frontline Nurses: Leaders in Pandemic Response* is a working group
supported by the Women Creating Change initiative of the Center for the
Study of Social Difference at Columbia University, in collaboration with
the Liberian Board of Nursing and Midwifery and the Sierra Leone Nurses
Association.

Mary Marshall Clark, Senior Research Scientist, INCITE
(Interdisciplinary Center for Innovative Theory and Empirics and
Director), Columbia Center for Oral History Research

Jennifer Dohrn, Assistant Dean, Office of Global Initiatives and
Assistant Professor at Columbia School of Nursing

Wilmot James, Senior Research Scholar, Institute for Social and Economic
Research and Policy, Columbia University

Susan Michaels-Strasser, Assistant Professor of Epidemiology, Columbia
University Medical Center

Annette Mwansa Nkowane, Former Technical Officer of Nursing and
Midwifery, World Health Organization (WHO)

Margaret Loma Phiri, Nursing and Midwifery Advisor, Seed Global
Health/Malawi

Victoria Rosner, Dean of Academic Affairs, Columbia University School of
General Studies and Adj. Associate Professor of English and Comparative
Literature

## Project Coordinators:

Hannah Bender, Columbia College (CC)

Kurt Holuba, Columbia School of General Studies (GS)

Jeremy Orloff, GS

Mina Shah, GS

## Research Associate

Erica Anderson, GS

## Student Associates

Emma Anderson, GS

Erica Anderson, GS

Emily Bartlett, Columbia School of Nursing (SN)

Lia Mary Farrell, GS

Sarah Gleason, SN

Corie Hahn, GS

Ming Pei, GS

Thomas Peterson, GS

Franci van Ryhn, GS

Maureen Saylor, SN

Katarina Skoko, GS

Lewis Rubin Thompson, GS

Romesh Withanage, GS

## Production

Architecture and development by Alex Gil,
Digital Scholarship Librarian, Columbia University Libraries.

Design by Channel Studio.

Hosting and support by Columbia University Libraries. Digital exhibit pages produced using [Wax](https://minicomp.github.io/wax/) by Marii Nyrop. 


## Special Thanks

Special thanks to Dolphine Buoga, Ayah Eldosougi, Marianne Hirsch,
Lorraine Frazier, Cecelia C. Kpangbala Flomo, Yu-Hui Ferng, Mary Fullah,
Darboi Korkoyah, Elaine Larson, Nancy K. Miller, Catherine LaSota, Steve
Nicholas, Joan Shepherd, Mame Toure, Paige West.
